Artifacts clarification (#1141)
opencontainers/image-spec: artifacts-guidance.md

# Guidance for Artifacts Authors

## Artifacts and Images

> This specification is primarily concerned with packaging two kinds of content: Artifacts, and Images. Both are representing using a [manifest](manifest.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This specification is primarily concerned with packaging two kinds of content: Artifacts and Images.
Both are represented using a [manifest](manifest.md).
```

(minor grammatical fix + one sentence per line to keep Brandon happy)

Images are defined in this specification as conformant content with a [config](config.md), designed to be interpreted by a runtime that implements the [runtime-spec][]. 

> Conversely, an Artifact is any other conformant content that **does not contain a config to be interpreted by a runtime-spec implementation.**

Reviewer: As a runtime-spec maintainer also, I'm very confused by this block -- the config object holds the data used to construct a runtime-spec "bundle", but it is not parsed/specified as part of the runtime-spec.  The two are very loosely related. :sweat_smile:

Author: Yeah, I'm not quite 100% happy with this either, but there are other parts of the spec that allude to the runtime spec, and "config that is meant to construct a runtime spec config base" still is a useful distinction, I believe.

Reviewer 2: This also seems at contradiction to the statement below: `It is possible that software implementing the runtime-spec may also be able to interpret Artifacts; however that is outside the scope of this spec.`  Couldn't a runtime generate a runtime-spec based on something other than a classic image-config?  The loose coupling seems like this would make this possible.

I am thinking eventually we will want a WASM Artifact that doesn't use the image config format but still gets converted to a runtime-spec for runtimes that support the artifact type.

Author: It definitely could; does anyone have suggestions on how to describe interpretation of the classical config.md config without muddying the waters with runtime-spec references?

Author: I think that referring to `conversion.md` and the mechanism therein is the clarification I want.

## Creating an Artifact

Content other than Images MAY be packaged using the [manifest]; this is otherwise known as an Artifact.
When this is done, the `artifactType` should be set to a custom media type, or the `config.mediaType` should not be a known Image config [media type](media-types.md).
Implementation details and examples are provided in the [image manifest specification](manifest.md#guidelines-for-artifact-usage).

> Note: Historically, due to registry limitations, some tools have created non-conformant Artifacts using the `application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json` value for `config.mediaType`.

Reviewer: IMO we really can't get away from specifying that "images" have strict layer media type requirements too -- if a given runtime can't parse one of the layers, it can't reasonably assume it can (safely) do anything with the rest of that registry object (manifest, artifact, image, whatever you want to call it).

Author: I don't want to address that in this PR yet. As a follow-up to this, I want us to discuss rootfs vs non-rootfs layer types and how we can consistently decide which layers must be interpreted and which are "optional."

## Interacting with Artifacts

> Runtimes implementing the [runtime-spec] SHOULD ignore unknown Artifacts when selecting content from an [index](image-index.md).

Author: This should be dependent on the `artifactType`, yes.

# Guidance for Artifacts Authors

## Artifacts and Images

This specification is primarily concerned with packaging two kinds of content: Artifacts and Images.
Both are representing using a [manifest](manifest.md).

> Images are defined in this specification as conformant content with a conformant [config](config.md), processed according to [conversion.md](conversion.md) to derive a [runtime-spec][] configuration blob.

Author: It's being defined in contrast to Artifacts for now... I think it's okay; this isn't the best place to have this long-term, but for now this seems like a relevant place to try and explain what the difference between an image and an artifact is.

> Images are defined in this specification as conformant content with a conformant [config](config.md), processed according to [conversion.md](conversion.md) to derive a [runtime-spec][] configuration blob.

Reviewer 3: fair.. 

```suggestion
Image with containing conformant content and with conformant [config](config.md) are processed according to [conversion.md](conversion.md) to derive a [runtime-spec][] configuration blob.
```

> Conversely, an Artifact is any other conformant content that **does not contain a config to be interpreted by a runtime-spec implementation using the conversion mechanism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Conversely, an Artifact is any other conformant content that **does** not contain a [config](config.md) to be interpreted by a runtime-spec implementation using the conversion mechanism.
```

## Creating an Artifact

> Content other than Images MAY be packaged using the [manifest]; this is otherwise known as an Artifact.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Content other than Images MAY be packaged using the [manifest](manifest.md); this is otherwise known as an Artifact.
```

When this is done, the `artifactType` should be set to a custom media type, or the `config.mediaType` should not be a known Image config [media type](media-types.md).
Implementation details and examples are provided in the [image manifest specification](manifest.md#guidelines-for-artifact-usage).

Note: Historically, due to registry limitations, some tools have created non-conformant Artifacts using the `application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json` value for `config.mediaType`.

## Interacting with Artifacts

> Software following the process described in [conversion.md](conversion.md) to create a [runtime-spec][] configuration blob SHOULD ignore unknown Artifacts (as determined by the presence of a descriptor `artifactType`) when selecting content from an [index](image-index.md).

Reviewer 5: This kind of makes sense, but also today no runtime ignores unknown artifact types because they aren't aware of the field since it is completely new.

> Software following the process described in [conversion.md](conversion.md) to create a [runtime-spec][] configuration blob SHOULD ignore unknown Artifacts (as determined by the presence of a descriptor `artifactType`) when selecting content from an [index](image-index.md).

Author: Yeah, this is somewhat of a new behavior, but at the same time is just an attempt to suggest what seems the only sane default. The idea here is that tools like BuildKit could stop producing `platform: unknown/unknown` to prevent their not-images from being considered for platform selection by simply switching to artifacts instead.

> Software following the process described in [conversion.md](conversion.md) to create a [runtime-spec][] configuration blob SHOULD ignore unknown Artifacts (as determined by the presence of a descriptor `artifactType`) when selecting content from an [index](image-index.md).

Reviewer 5: The issue here is not specifying a garbage platform will cause older implementations to blow up.
I'm not sure what that means for the wording here.
Putting anything in an index that is not an image manifest is not backwards compatible, I guess.

> Software following the process described in [conversion.md](conversion.md) to create a [runtime-spec][] configuration blob SHOULD ignore unknown Artifacts (as determined by the presence of a descriptor `artifactType`) when selecting content from an [index](image-index.md).

Author: Most tools should ignore artifacts already (but not as eagerly/not as codified as I'd like) by virtue of e.g. the config mediaType or the layer types, thankfully. See https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/issues/1131#issuecomment-1738134251 for some research into this (though I could definitely do more testing with existing implementations and mixed indexes).

> Software following the process described in [conversion.md](conversion.md) to create a [runtime-spec][] configuration blob SHOULD ignore unknown Artifacts (as determined by the presence of a descriptor `artifactType`) when selecting content from an [index](image-index.md).

Reviewer 5: I guess in this case the artifact type should be listed below valid runtime image manifests?

> It is possible that implementations may also be able to interpret known Artifact types; however that is outside the scope of this spec.

Reviewer 6: Can the phrase "known Artifact" be clarified here? 
Does it mean artifactType field exists or not?
Does it mean artifactType field exists but uses a well-known media-type?
Does it mean well-known media-type to outside world but not to this spec?
etc ... etc ...

> It is possible that software implementing the runtime-spec may also be able to interpret Artifacts; however that is outside the scope of this spec.

Author: I'd say implementation-defined; I think that if we tried to standardize a way to interpret certain artifacts in the OCI spec itself it would be in conversion.md and the runtime-spec.

> It is possible that software implementing the runtime-spec may also be able to interpret Artifacts; however that is outside the scope of this spec.

Reviewer 2: This makes sense. I could see some type of guidance on what must/should get converted to the runtime spec.

> Artifacts can be detected at runtime using by checking two keys:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Artifacts can be detected at runtime by checking two keys:
```

> 1. Is an `artifactType` present in the descriptor, or in the [manifest](manifest.md)?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Is an {`artifactType`, _string_} present, e.g. as a `subject` reference in an image/artifact manifest or as a self reference definition in the [image artifact manifest `artifactType` field](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md#image-manifest-property-descriptions)?
```

> 2. Is the `config.mediaType` of the manifest something other than a [known media type](media-types.md) for [config](config.md)?

Reviewer 3: seems like that's 3 keys.?  

probably a good idea to explain here, not following the if the `config.mediaType` is unknown it's an artifact thought..

Reviewer 6: Now that image-spec and dist-spec officially have "artifact" support, perhaps revisit this? converging to config.mediaType=empty and basically only do 1. above?

Reviewer 3: Sure I see know what @neersighted meant.

Proposed text:

An oci image manifest can be identified as an artifact of some type other than an specified oci container image by 1) first checking if the artifact type value is set and if so whether it is valid by RFC6838, 2) otherwise checking if the config mediaType value is not one of the known OCI Image Types and is valid by RFC6838.

Proposed pseudo explanation:

func checkForArtifactType(manifest) artifactType, error 
{
manifestArtifactTypeMustBeSet = UNKNOWN
manifestArtifactTypeIsSet = UNKNOWN
manifestArtifactTypeMustBeValid = UNKNOWN
manifestArtifactTypeIsValid = UNKNOWN
configMediaTypeIsOCIImageType = UNKNOWN
configMediaTypeIsValidArtifact = UNKNOWN

if manifest.config.mediaType is "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json" { 
   manifestArtifactTypeMustBeSet = TRUE;
}

manifestArtifactTypeIsSet = is manifest.artifactType unset or nil? 

if manifestArtifactTypeIsSet {
   manifestArtifactTypeMustBeValid = TRUE;
}

if manifestArtifactTypeMustBeValid {
   manifestArtifactTypeIsValid = checkRFC6838(manifest.artifactType);
   if !manifestArtifactTypeIsValid {
      return with error(manifest.artifactType + "is not valid")
   }
   return manifest.artifactType // we have the artifact type we were looking for
}

configMediaTypeIsOCIImageType = isKnownOCIImageConfigMediaType(manifest.config.mediaType)

if configMediaTypeIsOCIImageType { 
   return image .. no artifact found
}

// not "oci.empty" and not an oci image media type
configMediaTypeIsValidArtifact = checkRFC6838(manifest.config.mediaType);

if !configMediaTypeIsValidArtifact {
   return with error(manifest.config.mediaType + "is not valid") 
}

return manifest.config.mediaType // we have the artifact config media type we were looking for
} // end checkForArtifactType()

func checkRFC6838 (type string) BOOL 
{
  // returns true if not nil and complies with [RFC 6838](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6838), including the [naming requirements in its section 4.2](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6838#section-4.2)
}

Reviewer 6: This would be a nice subroutine to add to this repo - likely to be heavily used going forward. 

1. Runnable container images
2. Non-runnable not-container images (referrer or otherwise)
3. Runnable non-container images

^ if I were to summarize.

Reviewer 6: Just a thought ... OCI = packaging + distribution + "bring your own runtime (BYOR)"?

> If either of these tests is true, then the content is an Artifact.

Reviewer 8: My understanding is that the wasm folks want to use the artifact type. It's runnable by the wasm runtime and not something that is aligned with the runtime spec. 
How can we support them by enabling the usage of `artifactType` ?  @cpuguy83 @tianon what do you folks think?

Author: That is covered by the case of "runtime has special knowledge of how to handle an artifact."

For the WASM-with-existing-containerd case, they should not set the artifact type as they will just be a "regular" image with special layers and a WASM platform object.

Reviewer 8: I’m probably at the risk of swimming against the current here but I honestly was hoping that the artifact type could be set by anyone and not limited to. 
if the runtime spec doesn’t want the artifact type set then it can mandate that but WASM runtimes don’t need to honor that.

Author: The issue is that I need a way to tell "not runnable" from "runnable" in containerd; I'd rather not have "an image" that is also "an artifact" at the same time as we get back to the `platform: none/none` pattern.

Author: cc @jsturtevant; this is meant to enable (through clarity of what runtimes likely SHOULD support) efforts to make "native WASM images" work with "existing runtimes;" I see no reason that something that is otherwise a conformant image (and just uses a `wasm` platform) needs to set `artifactType`.

This is also somewhat related to https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/pull/1141#discussion_r1371576029, which I still want to keep as a follow-up as the scope of this PR has grown quite a bit.

Author: It's certainly possible; as discussed on the last PR having the standard config mediaType with a custom artifactType is rather outside what most would consider idiomatic, however.

The `platform` field on the descriptor should be the same as the platform in the `config` blob, so the platform of the image should be accessible via the same mechanism as the top-level `artifactType`.

Additionally, I do think that an annotation with e.g. "WASM image standard version" or similar would be perfectly idiomatic if you need some additional metadata.

WDYT?
